

Firms are institutions whose purpose is to provide goods and services. Some firms can have very complex structures, defined by objectives, technology, hierarchies, labor contracts and much more. However, two basic traits characterize almost all firms: its technology, i.e. what and how the firm produces the goods or services it provides, and the objective of maximizing its profit. Thus, in these chapters we will define a firm in the perhaps simplest possible way, that is, as a “black box” using inputs to produce output, with the goal of maximizing its profit.

As a first step, we must ask ourselves what are the <b>production possibilities</b> available to the firm, that is, the input-output combinations that the firm's tecnology allows. For simplicity,  we will assume that the firm's output
<span class="marginnote">
In reality, almost all firms provide several types of products.
</span>
is a single good. For concretenss, in our narrative the firm will be a bakery that produces bread, measured in kilograms (kg) per week. And again for simplicity, we will also assume that the firm uses a single input,
<span class="marginnote">
What we call labor therefore represents what in reality is a combination of factors: water, flour, and so on, besides labor itself.
</span>
namely labor, measured in days (abbreviated dd).



<a id="gr_prod1"><strong>Figure 7.1.1</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_prod1" %}











<h2 id="SUBSEC_prod1">The Firm's Production Function</h2>
In order to describe a firm's efficient production frontier, namely the only production possibilities the firm cares about (the efficient ones), we use a <b>production function</b>. This is a function <span style="color: blue;">$Q=F(L)$</span> that specifies the maximum quantity $Q$ of output that the firm can obtain from any given quantity of labor $L$.

A type of production function very frequently used by economists (the only one we consider in detail in these notes) has the following form:
<p><span style="color: Blue;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 Q = A L^\alpha
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>
where $A$ and $\alpha$ are positive numbers, and often it is assumed that $\alpha=0.5$, i.e. that $Q=A\sqrt{L}$, or that $\alpha=1$, i.e. that $Q=AL$. 

We have
<span class="marginnote">
  In <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/7/1#gr_prod1">Figure 7.1.1</a> the quantities of output indicated on the vertical axis are rounded. For example, with $L=2$ the quantity of output $Q=80\sqrt{2}=113.137..$ was rounded to 113.
</span>
already seen this type of production function: setting $A=80$ and $\alpha=0.5$ we obtain the efficient frontier represented in <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/7/1#gr_prod1">Figure 7.1.1</a>.

In <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/7/1#gr_fprod1">Figure 7.1.2</a> below, we can see how the shape of the production function changes as $A$ and $\alpha$ change, under the assumption that labor is finely divisible.

<a id="gr_fprod1"><strong>Figure 7.1.2</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_fprod1" %}

Note that, as $\alpha$ increses, the production function becomes less curved, i.e. more similar to a straight line. Indeed, setting $\alpha=1$ gives the simplest type of production function, the <i>linear</i> one, of the form
<p><span style="color: Blue;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 Q = A L
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>
represented below.

<a id="gr_fprod2"><strong>Figure 7.1.3</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_fprod2" %}























<h2 id="SUBSEC_prod2">Firm's Productivity</h2>

In brief, a firm's productivity is given by the ratio between quantity of output and corresponding quantity of input (labor). Depending on what we mean exactly by "quantity of input" we obtain different measures of productivity. Two of these, <b>average product</b> and <b>marginal product</b>, we discuss next.










<h2 id="SUBSEC_AP">Average Product</h2>
Just as we can measure our average speed during a car trip by taking the ratio between distance covered and time elapsed, similarly we can measure a firm's average productivity by taking the ratio between quantity of output produced and quantity of labor hired. And just like average speed can depend on how long we drive (in a longer trip we may feel tired and hence become more prudent and slower as time goes by), a firm's average productivity depends, in general, on how much labor the firm hires. It is, in other words, a function of $L$. This function is called <b>average product of labor</b>. It measures, for each possible quantity $L$ of labor hired by the firm, the quantity of output produced, on average, by each unit of labor. The average product of labor is denoted by $AP_L$ and its formula is the following:
<p><span style="color: Brown;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 AP_L = \frac{Q}{L} = \frac{F(L)}{L}
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>
To understand better the notion of average product, let us return to the example illustrated in <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/7/1#gr_prod1">Figure 7.1.1</a>. In the following figure we present again that example; this time, we show also the average product.

<a id="gr_prod1bis"><strong>Figure 7.1.4</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_prod1bis" %}



Given a production function of the form $Q = AL^\alpha$, the average product formula is
<p><span style="color: Brown;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 AP_L = \frac{AL^\alpha}{L}=AL^{\alpha-1}.
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>
It is worth noting
<span class="marginnote">
Continuing with the analogy with average speed, this would mean covering a
<i>proportionally</i> shorter distance when the trip lasts longer, e.g. because one gets tired while driving.
</span>
that if $\alpha<1$ then the exponent $\alpha-1$ is negative and therefore average product of labor is decreasing. Thst is, average product gets smaller when the quantity of labor hired by the firm is larger. For example, with $\alpha=0.5$ we have $AP_L=A/\sqrt{L}$. The following figure shows how output and average product of labor vary, as we change the parameters of the production function ($A$ and $\alpha$) or the quantity of labor hired by the firm.

<a id="gr_fprod1bis"><strong>Figure 7.1.5</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_fprod1bis" %}

Note that, given any fixed quantity of labor, the quantity of output is higher (and hence average product of labor is also higher), the larger is the value of $A$. For example, a firm characterized by the production function $Q=10L^{0.5}$ is more productive than a firm whose production function is $Q=5L^{0.5}$.

Finally, note that in the case of a linear production function ($\alpha=1$), the average product of labor
<span class="marginnote">
Continuing again the analogy with average speed, this means that whatever the time length of our car trip, our speed is the same, i.e. we cover <i>proportionally</i> the same distance when the trip lasts longer.
</span>
becomes
<p><span style="color: Brown;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 AP_L = \frac{AL}{L}=A.
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>
In other words, in the linear case average product is constant, i.e. independent of the quantity of labor hired by the firm, as we illustrate below.

<a id="gr_fprod2bis"><strong>Figure 7.1.6</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_fprod2bis" %}






















<h2 id="SUBSEC_MP"> Marginal Product</h2>
To introduce the notion of marginal product, it is useful to go back to the analogy with speed. Say it is 7:45 PM and, while driving our car, we see the car's speedometer indicate "72 km/h". What does this number represent? It is a measure of the <i>instantaneous</i> speed of the car at 7:45 PM. In order to compute that number, the instrument performs two tasks. First, it measures the distance (in kilometers) covered in the fraction of time, say a tenth of a second, immediately before 7:45 PM. Second, given that speed is measures in kilometers per hour (km/h) and there are 36000 tenths of a second in one hour, it divides the distance by $1/36000$ (i.e. multiples it by 36000). In other words, the instrument computes the average speed during the extremely short trip that starts one tenth of a second before 7:45 PM, and ends at 7:45 PM. The indication "72 km/h" is apparently due to the fact that in that tenth of a second the car has covered 2 meters. Indeed, 2 meters are 1/500 of a kilometer, so the average speed during that tiny trip, i.e. the instantaneous speed at 7:45 PM, was 2 meters per tenth of a second, or $(1/500)/(1/36000)=72$ kilometers per hour.

Just like instantaneous speed is nothing else than average speed during the super-short trip that started a tenth of a second before glancing at the speedometer, similarly the <b>marginal product of labor</b> is just the average product of the last, minimal quantity $\Delta L$ of labor  hired by the firm. Like average product, marginal product is also a function of the quantity $L$ of labor hired by the firm, and its formula is
<p><span style="color: Red;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 MP_L = \frac{\Delta Q}{\Delta L} = \frac{F(L)-F(L-\Delta L)}{\Delta L}
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>
When labor is finely divisible, the marginal oproduct of labor is simply the derivative of the production function. Thus, if the firm's production function is of the type $Q = AL^\alpha$, its formula becomes
<p><span style="color: Red;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 MP_L = F'(L) = \alpha AL^{\alpha-1}.
\end{gathered}\)
</span></p>
Like average product, marginal product is decreasing whenever $\alpha<1$, given that the exponent $\alpha-1$ is negative in this case. In other words, the larger the quantity of labor hired by the firm, the smaller is the additional output obtained from the last fraction of labor hired.

To understand better the notion of marginal product, let us return to the example illustrated in <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/en/I/7/1#gr_prod1">Figure 7.1.1</a>.

<a id="gr_prod1ter"><strong>Figure 7.1.7</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_prod1ter" %}

The following figure shows how output, average product and marginal product of labor vary, as we change the parameters of the production function ($A$ and $\alpha$) or the quantity of labor hired by the firm.

<a id="gr_fprod1ter"><strong>Figure 7.1.8</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_fprod1ter" %}

Average and marginal product of labor are closely related. As the figure shows, the two fuctions are both decreasing, but average product is higher than marginal product.
<span class="marginnote">
If the marginal product were <i>increasing</i> (you can verify this by considering a value of $\alpha$ larger than 1), then average product would also be increasing, and it would be <i>lower</i> than marginal product.
</span>
The reason for this is that marginal product is decreasing. Intuitively, think of what happens to your school grade average if during the year you get lower and lower grades. The average grade will also get lower and lower, but it will always be higher than the last grade you received.


Finally, not that if $\alpha=1$ then the marginal product of labor is constant, and it coincides with the average product: $MP_L=A$. We illustrate the case $\alpha=1$ in the figure below.


<a id="gr_fprod2ter"><strong>Figure 7.1.9</strong></a>
{% include textbook-graph.html graph="/firm/gr_fprod2ter" %}











































<h2 id="SUBSEC_prod4">Inverse Production Function</h2>
So far we have described the technology of a firm by means of a production function, that is, viewing the quantity of output produced as a function of the quantity of labor hired. For example, assuming that the production function is $Q=80\sqrt{L}$ means assuming that by hiring $L=1$ units of labor the firm obtains $Q=80\sqrt{1}=80$ units of output, by hiring $L=4$ units of labor the firm obtains $Q=80\sqrt{4}=160$ units of output, and so on.

In an equivalent way to describe the technology of the firm, we can view the quantity of labor hired as a function quantity of output produced. Instead of asking how much output the firm obtains from each possible quantity of labor, we can ask: <i>how much labor does the firm need, in order to obtain each possible quantity of output</i>? Giving an answer to this question means specifying the <b>inverse production function</b> of the firm. Mathematically, this is simply the inverse function of the production function. For example, if the production function is $Q=80\sqrt{L}$, the corresponding inverse production function is $L=Q^2/6400$.

More generally, given any production of the form $Q=AL^\alpha$, it is easy to see that the corresponding inverse production function is given by
<p>
<span style="color: Blue;">
\(\begin{gathered}
 L = \frac{1}{A^{1/\alpha}}Q^{1/\alpha}
\end{gathered}\)
</span>
</p>
As we shall see in the next chapter, computing the inverse production function of the firm is important for the calculation of the firm's costs.



